Prabhupada  > Books > Srimad-Bhagavatam > Canto 6 > SB 6.6PrabhupadaBooksSrimad-BhagavatamCanto 6SB 6.6
Chapter Six
The Progeny of the Daughters of Dakṣa
    
 
Chapter Six
 
The Progeny of the Daughters of Dakṣa
 
As described in this chapter, Prajāpati Dakṣa begot sixty daughters in the womb of his wife Asiknī. These daughters were given in charity to various persons to increase the population. Since these offspring of Dakṣa were women, Nārada Muni did not try to lead them toward the renounced order of life. Thus the daughters were saved from Nārada Muni. Ten of the daughters were given in marriage to Dharmarāja, thirteen to Kaśyapa Muni, and twenty-seven to the moon-god, Candra. In this way fifty daughters were distributed, and of the other ten daughters, four were given to Kaśyapa and two each to Bhūta, Aṅgirā and Kṛśāśva. One should know that it is because of the union of these sixty daughters with various exalted personalities that the entire universe was filled with various kinds of living entities, such as human beings, demigods, demons, beasts, birds and serpents.
 
TEXT 1
 
śrī-śuka uvāca
 
tataḥ prācetaso ’siknyām
 
anunītaḥ svayambhuvā
 
ṣaṣṭiṁ sañjanayām āsa
 
duhitṝḥ pitṛ-vatsalāḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca—Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tataḥ—after that incident; prācetasaḥ—Dakṣa; asiknyām—in his wife named Asiknī; anunītaḥ—pacified; svayambhuvā—by Lord Brahmā; ṣaṣṭim—sixty; sañjanayām āsa—begot; duhitṝḥ—daughters; pitṛ-vatsalāḥ—all very affectionate to their father.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, thereafter, at the request of Lord Brahmā, Prajāpati Dakṣa, who is known as Prācetasa, begot sixty daughters in the womb of his wife Asiknī. All the daughters were very affectionate toward their father.
 
PURPORT
 
After the incidents concerning the loss of his many sons, Dakṣa repented his misunderstanding with Nārada Muni. Lord Brahmā then saw Dakṣa and instructed him to beget children again. This time Dakṣa was very cautious to beget female children instead of male children so that Nārada Muni would not disturb them by urging them to accept the renounced order. Females are not meant for the renounced order of life; they should be faithful to their good husbands, for if a husband is competent for liberation, his wife will also achieve liberation with him. As stated in the śāstra, the results of a husband’s pious activities are shared by his wife. Therefore a woman’s duty is to be very chaste and faithful to her husband. Then without separate endeavor she will share in all the profit the husband earns.
 
TEXT 2
 
daśa dharmāya kāyādād
 
dvi-ṣaṭ tri-ṇava cendave
 
bhūtāṅgiraḥ-kṛśāśvebhyo
 
dve dve tārkṣyāya cāparāḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
daśa—ten; dharmāya—unto King Dharma, Yamarāja; kāya—unto Kaśyapa; adāt—gave; dvi-ṣaṭ—twice six and one (thirteen); tri-nava—thrice nine (twenty-seven); ca—also; indave—unto the moon-god; bhūta-aṅgiraḥ-kṛśāśvebhyaḥ—unto Bhūta, Aṅgirā and Kṛśāśva; dve dve—two each; tārkṣyāya—again unto Kaśyapa; ca—and; aparāḥ—the balance.
 
TRANSLATION
 
He gave ten daughters in charity to Dharmarāja [Yamarāja], thirteen to Kaśyapa [first twelve and then one more], twenty-seven to the moon-god, and two each to Aṅgirā, Kṛśāśva and Bhūta. The other four daughters were given to Kaśyapa. [Thus Kaśyapa received seventeen daughters in all.]
 
TEXT 3
 
nāmadheyāny amūṣāṁ tvaṁ
 
sāpatyānāṁ ca me śṛṇu
 
yāsāṁ prasūti-prasavair
 
lokā āpūritās trayaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
nāmadheyāni—the different names; amūṣām—of them; tvam—you; sa-apatyānām—with their offspring; ca—and; me—from me; śṛṇu—please hear; yāsām—of all of whom; prasūti-prasavaiḥ—by so many children and descendants; lokāḥ—the worlds; āpūritāḥ—populated; trayaḥ—three (the upper, middle and lower worlds).
 
TRANSLATION
 
Now please hear from me the names of all these daughters and their descendants, who filled all the three worlds.
 
TEXT 4
 
bhānur lambā kakud yāmir
 
viśvā sādhyā marutvatī
 
vasur muhūrtā saṅkalpā
 
dharma-patnyaḥ sutāñ śṛṇu
 
SYNONYMS
 
bhānuḥ—Bhānu; lambā—Lambā; kakut—Kakud; yāmiḥ—Yāmi; viśvā—Viśvā; sādhyā—Sādhyā; marutvatī—Marutvatī; vasuḥ—Vasu; muhūrtā—Muhūrtā; saṅkalpā—Saṅkalpā; dharma-patnyaḥ—the wives of Yamarāja; sutān—their sons; śṛṇu—now hear of.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The ten daughters given to Yamarāja were named Bhānu, Lambā, Kakud, Yāmi, Viśvā, Sādhyā, Marutvatī, Vasu, Muhūrtā and Saṅkalpā. Now hear the names of their sons.
 
TEXT 5
 
bhānos tu deva-ṛṣabha
 
indrasenas tato nṛpa
 
vidyota āsīl lambāyās
 
tataś ca stanayitnavaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
bhānoḥ—from the womb of Bhānu; tu—of course; deva-ṛṣabhaḥ—Deva-ṛṣabha; indrasenaḥ—Indrasena; tataḥ—from him (Deva-ṛṣabha); nṛpa—O King; vidyotaḥ—Vidyota; āsīt—appeared; lambāyāḥ—from the womb of Lambā; tataḥ—from him; ca—and; stanayitnavaḥ—all the clouds.
 
TRANSLATION
 
O King, a son named Deva-ṛṣabha was born from the womb of Bhānu, and from him came a son named Indrasena. From the womb of Lambā came a son named Vidyota, who generated all the clouds.
 
TEXT 6
 
kakudaḥ saṅkaṭas tasya
 
kīkaṭas tanayo yataḥ
 
bhuvo durgāṇi yāmeyaḥ
 
svargo nandis tato ’bhavat
 
SYNONYMS
 
kakudaḥ—from the womb of Kakud; saṅkaṭaḥ—Saṅkaṭa; tasya—from him; kīkaṭaḥ—Kīkaṭa; tanayaḥ—son; yataḥ—from whom; bhuvaḥ—of the earth; durgāṇi—many demigods, protectors of this universe (which is called Durgā); yāmeyaḥ—of Yāmi; svargaḥ—Svarga; nandiḥ—Nandi; tataḥ—from him (Svarga); abhavat—was born.
 
TRANSLATION
 
From the womb of Kakud came the son named Saṅkaṭa, whose son was named Kīkaṭa. From Kīkaṭa came the demigods named Durgā. From Yāmi came the son named Svarga, whose son was named Nandi.
 
TEXT 7
 
viśve-devās tu viśvāyā
 
aprajāṁs tān pracakṣate
 
sādhyo-gaṇaś ca sādhyāyā
 
arthasiddhis tu tat-sutaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
viśve-devāḥ—the demigods named the Viśvadevas; tu—but; viśvāyāḥ—from Viśvā; aprajān—without sons; tān—them; pracakṣate—it is said; sādhyaḥ-gaṇaḥ—the demigods named the Sādhyas; ca—and; sādhyāyāḥ—from the womb of Sādhya-; arthasiddhiḥ—Arthasiddhi; tu—but; tat-sutaḥ—the son of the Sādhyas.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The sons of Viśvā were the Viśvadevas, who had no progeny. From the womb of Sādhyā came the Sādhyas, who had a son named Arthasiddhi.
 
TEXT 8
 
marutvāṁś ca jayantaś ca
 
marutvatyā babhūvatuḥ
 
jayanto vāsudevāṁśa
 
upendra iti yaṁ viduḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
marutvān—Marutvān; ca—also; jayantaḥ—Jayanta; ca—and; marutvatyāḥ—from Marutvatī; babhūvatuḥ—took birth; jayantaḥ—Jayanta; vāsudeva-aṁśaḥ—an expansion of Vāsudeva; upendraḥ—Upendra; iti—thus; yam—whom; viduḥ—they know.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The two sons who took birth from the womb of Marutvatī were Marutvān and Jayanta. Jayanta, who is an expansion of Lord Vāsudeva, is known as Upendra.
 
TEXT 9
 
mauhūrtikā deva-gaṇā
 
muhūrtāyāś ca jajñire
 
ye vai phalaṁ prayacchanti
 
bhūtānāṁ sva-sva-kālajam
 
SYNONYMS
 
mauhūrtikāḥ—Mauhūrtikas; deva-gaṇāḥ—the demigods; muhūrtāyāḥ—from the womb of Muhūrtā; ca—and; jajñire—took birth; ye—all of whom; vai—indeed; phalam—result; prayacchanti—deliver; bhūtānām—of the living entities; sva-sva—their own; kāla-jam—born of time.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The demigods named the Mauhūrtikas took birth from the womb of Muhūrtā. These demigods deliver the results of actions to the living entities of their respective times.
 
TEXTS 10–11
 
saṅkalpāyās tu saṅkalpaḥ
 
kāmaḥ saṅkalpajaḥ smṛtaḥ
 
vasavo ’ṣṭau vasoḥ putrās
 
teṣāṁ nāmāni me śṛṇu
 
droṇaḥ prāṇo dhruvo ’rko ’gnir
 
doṣo vāstur vibhāvasuḥ
 
droṇasyābhimateḥ patnyā
 
harṣa-śoka-bhayādayaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
saṅkalpāyāḥ—from the womb of Saṅkalpā; tu—but; saṅkalpaḥ—Saṅkalpa; kāmaḥ—Kāma; saṅkalpa-jaḥ—the son of Saṅkalpā; smṛtaḥ—known; vasavaḥ aṣṭau—the eight Vasus; vasoḥ—of Vasu; putrāḥ—the sons; teṣām—of them; nāmāni—the names; me—from me; śṛṇu—just hear; droṇaḥ—Droṇa; prāṇaḥ—Prāṇa; dhruvaḥ—Dhruva; arkaḥ—Arka; agniḥ—Agni; doṣaḥ—Doṣa; vāstuḥ—Vāstu; vibhāvasuḥ—Vibhāvasu; droṇasya—of Droṇa; abhimateḥ—from Abhimati; patnyāḥ—the wife; harṣa-śoka-bhaya-ādayaḥ—the sons named Harṣa, Śoka, Bhaya and so on.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The son of Saṅkalpā was known as Saṅkalpa, and from him lust was born. The sons of Vasu were known as the eight Vasus. Just hear their names from me: Droṇa, Prāṇa, Dhruva, Arka, Agni, Doṣa, Vāstu and Vibhāvasu. From Abhimati, the wife of the Vasu named Droṇa, were generated the sons named Harṣa, Śoka, Bhaya and so on.
 
TEXT 12
 
prāṇasyorjasvatī bhāryā
 
saha āyuḥ purojavaḥ
 
dhruvasya bhāryā dharaṇir
 
asūta vividhāḥ puraḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
prāṇasya—of Prāna; ūrjasvatī—Ūrjasvatī; bhāryā—the wife; sahaḥ—Saha; āyuḥ—Āyus; purojavaḥ—Purojava; dhruvasya—of Dhruva; bhāryā—the wife; dharaṇiḥ—Dharaṇi; asūta—gave birth to; vividhāḥ—the various; puraḥ—cities and towns.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Ūrjasvatī, the wife of Prāṇa, gave birth to three sons, named Saha, Āyus and Purojava. The wife of Dhruva was known as Dharaṇi, and from her womb various cities took birth.
 
TEXT 13
 
arkasya vāsanā bhāryā
 
putrās tarṣādayaḥ smṛtāḥ
 
agner bhāryā vasor dhārā
 
putrā draviṇakādayaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
arkasya—of Arka; vāsanā—Vāsanā; bhāryā—the wife; putrāḥ—the sons; tarṣa-ādayaḥ—named Tarṣa and so on; smṛtāḥ—celebrated; agneḥ—of Agni; bhāryā—wife; vasoḥ—the Vasu; dhārā—Dhārā; putrāḥ—the sons; draviṇaka-ādayaḥ—known as Draviṇaka and so on.
 
TRANSLATION
 
From the womb of Vāsanā, the wife of Arka, came many sons, headed by Tarṣa. Dhārā, the wife of the Vasu named Agni, gave birth to many sons, headed by Draviṇaka.
 
TEXT 14
 
skandaś ca kṛttikā-putro
 
ye viśākhādayas tataḥ
 
doṣasya śarvarī-putraḥ
 
śiśumāro hareḥ kalā
 
SYNONYMS
 
skandaḥ—Skanda; ca—also; kṛttikā-putraḥ—the son of Kṛttikā; ye—all of whom; viśākha-ādayaḥ—headed by Viśākha; tataḥ—from him (Skanda); doṣasya—of Doṣa; śarvarī-putraḥ—the son of his wife Śarvarī; śiśumāraḥ—Śiśumāra; hareḥ kalā—an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
 
TRANSLATION
 
From Kṛttikā, another wife of Agni, came the son named Skanda, Kārttikeya, whose sons were headed by Viśākha. From the womb of Śarvarī, the wife of the Vasu named Doṣa, came the son named Śiśumāra, who was an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
 
TEXT 15
 
vāstor āṅgirasī-putro
 
viśvakarmākṛtī-patiḥ
 
tato manuś cākṣuṣo ’bhūd
 
viśve sādhyā manoḥ sutāḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
vāstoḥ—of Vāstu; āṅgirasī—of his wife named Āṅgirasī; putraḥ—the son; viśvakarmā—Viśvakarmā; ākṛtī-patiḥ—the husband of Ākṛtī; tataḥ—from them; manuḥ cākṣuṣaḥ—the Manu named Cākṣuṣa; abhūt—was born; viśve—the Viśvadevas; sādhyāḥ—the Sādhyas; manoḥ—of Manu; sutāḥ—the sons.
 
TRANSLATION
 
From Āṅgirasī, the wife of the Vasu named Vāstu, was born the great architect Viśvakarmā. Viśvakarmā became the husband of Ākṛtī, from whom the Manu named Cākṣuṣa was born. The sons of Manu were known as the Viśvadevas and Sādhyas.
 
TEXT 16
 
vibhāvasor asūtoṣā
 
vyuṣṭaṁ rociṣam ātapam
 
pañcayāmo ’tha bhūtāni
 
yena jāgrati karmasu
 
SYNONYMS
 
vibhāvasoḥ—of Vibhāvasu; asūta—gave birth to; ūṣā—named Ūṣā; vyuṣṭam—Vyuṣṭa; rociṣam—Rociṣa; ātapam—Ātapa; pañcayāmaḥ—Pañcayāma; atha—thereafter; bhūtāni—the living entities; yena—by whom; jāgrati—are awakened; karmasu—in material activities.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Ūṣā, the wife of Vibhāvasu, gave birth to three sons—Vyuṣṭa, Rociṣa and Ātapa. From Ātapa came Pañcayāma, the span of day, who awakens all living entities to material activities.
 
TEXTS 17–18
 
sarūpāsūta bhūtasya
 
bhāryā rudrāṁś ca koṭiśaḥ
 
raivato ’jo bhavo bhīmo
 
vāma ugro vṛṣākapiḥ
 
ajaikapād ahirbradhno
 
bahurūpo mahān iti
 
rudrasya pārṣadāś cānye
 
ghorāḥ preta-vināyakāḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
sarūpā—Sarūpā; asūta—gave birth; bhūtasya—of Bhūta; bhāryā—the wife; rudrān—Rudras; ca—and; koṭiśaḥ—ten million; raivataḥ—Raivata; ajaḥ—Aja; bhavaḥ—Bhava; bhīmaḥ—Bhīma; vāmaḥ—Vāma; ugraḥ—Ugra; vṛṣākapiḥ—Vṛṣākapi; ajaikapāt—Ajaikapāt; ahirbradhnaḥ—Ahirbradhna; bahurūpaḥ—Bahurūpa; mahān—Mahān; iti—thus; rudrasya—of these Rudras; pārṣadāḥ—their associates; ca—and; anye—other; ghorāḥ—very fearful; preta—ghosts; vināyakāḥ—and hobgoblins.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Sarūpā, the wife of Bhūta, gave birth to the ten million Rudras, of whom the eleven principle Rudras were Raivata, Aja, Bhava, Bhīma, Vāma, Ugra, Vṛṣākapi, Ajaikapāt, Ahirbradhna, Bahurūpa and Mahān. Their associates, the ghosts and goblins, who are very fearful, were born of the other wife of Bhūta.
 
PURPORT
 
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that Bhūta had two wives. One of them, Sarūpā, gave birth to the eleven Rudras, and the other wife gave birth to the associates of the Rudras known as the ghosts and hobgoblins.
 
TEXT 19
 
prajāpater aṅgirasaḥ
 
svadhā patnī pitṝn atha
 
atharvāṅgirasaṁ vedaṁ
 
putratve cākarot satī
 
SYNONYMS
 
prajāpateḥ aṅgirasaḥ—of another prajāpati, known as Aṅgirā; svadhā—Svadhā; patnī—his wife; pitṝn—the Pitās; atha—thereafter; atharva-āṅgirasam—Atharvāṅgirasa; vedam—the personified Veda; putratve—as the son; ca—and; akarot—accepted; satī—Satī.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The prajāpati Aṅgirā had two wives, named Svadhā and Satī. The wife named Svadhā accepted all the Pitās as her sons, and Satī accepted the Atharvāṅgirasa Veda as her son.
 
TEXT 20
 
kṛśāśvo ’rciṣi bhāryāyāṁ
 
dhūmaketum ajījanat
 
dhiṣaṇāyāṁ vedaśiro
 
devalaṁ vayunaṁ manum
 
SYNONYMS
 
kṛśāśvaḥ—Kṛśāśva; arciṣi—Arcis; bhāryāyām—in his wife; dhūmaketum—to Dhūmaketu; ajījanat—gave birth; dhiṣaṇāyām—in the wife known as Dhiṣaṇā; vedaśiraḥ—Vedaśirā; devalam—Devala; vayunam—Vayuna; manum—Manu.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Kṛśāśva had two wives, named Arcis and Dhiṣaṇā. In the wife named Arcis he begot Dhūmaketu and in Dhiṣaṇā he begot four sons, named Vedaśirā, Devala, Vayuna and Manu.
 
TEXTS 21–22
 
tārkṣyasya vinatā kadrūḥ
 
pataṅgī yāminīti ca
 
pataṅgy asūta patagān
 
yāminī śalabhān atha
 
suparṇāsūta garuḍaṁ
 
sākṣād yajñeśa-vāhanam
 
sūrya-sūtam anūruṁ ca
 
kadrūr nāgān anekaśaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
tārkṣyasya—of Kaśyapa, whose other name is Tārkṣya; vinatā—Vinatā; kadrūḥ—Kadrū; pataṅgī—Pataṅgī; yāminī—Yāminī; iti—thus; ca—and; pataṅgī—Pataṅgī; asūta—gave birth; patagān—to birds of different varieties; yāminī—Yāminī; śalabhān—(gave birth to) locusts; atha—thereafter; suparṇā—the wife named Vinatā; asūta—gave birth; garuḍam—to the celebrated bird known as Garuḍa; sākṣāt—directly; yajñeśa-vāhanam—the carrier of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; sūrya-sūtam—the chariot driver of the sun-god; anūrum—Anūru; ca—and; kadrūḥ—Kadrū; nāgān—serpents; anekaśaḥ—in varieties.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Kaśyapa, who is also named Tārkṣya, had four wives—Vinatā [Suparṇā], Kadrū, Pataṅgī and Yāminī. Pataṅgī gave birth to many kinds of birds, and Yāminī gave birth to locusts. Vinatā [Suparṇā] gave birth to Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, and to Anūru, or Aruṇa, the chariot driver of the sun-god. Kadrū gave birth to different varieties of serpents.
 
TEXT 23
 
kṛttikādīni nakṣatrāṇ-
 
īndoḥ patnyas tu bhārata
 
dakṣa-śāpāt so ’napatyas
 
tāsu yakṣma-grahārditaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
kṛttikā-ādīni—headed by Kṛttikā; nakṣatrāṇi—the constellations; indoḥ—of the moon-god; patnyaḥ—the wives; tu—but; bhārata—O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of the dynasty of Bharata; dakṣa-śāpāt—because of being cursed by Dakṣa; saḥ—the moon-god; anapatyaḥ—without children; tāsu—in so many wives; yakṣma-graha-arditaḥ—being oppressed by a disease that brings about gradual destruction.
 
TRANSLATION
 
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the Bhāratas, the constellations named Kṛttikā were all wives of the moon-god. However, because Prajāpati Dakṣa had cursed him to suffer from a disease causing gradual destruction, the moon-god could not beget children in any of his wives.
 
TEXTS 24–26
 
punaḥ prasādya taṁ somaḥ
 
kalā lebhe kṣaye ditāḥ
 
śṛṇu nāmāni lokānāṁ
 
mātṝṇāṁ śaṅkarāṇi ca
 
atha kaśyapa-patnīnāṁ
 
yat-prasūtam idaṁ jagat
 
aditir ditir danuḥ kāṣṭhā
 
ariṣṭā surasā ilā
 
muniḥ krodhavaśā tāmrā
 
surabhiḥ saramā timiḥ
 
timer yādo-gaṇā āsan
 
śvāpadāḥ saramā-sutāḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
punaḥ—again; prasādya—pacifying; tam—him (Prajāpati Dakṣa); somaḥ—the moon-god; kalāḥ—portions of light; lebhe—achieved; kṣaye—in gradual destruction (the dark fortnight); ditāḥ—removed; śṛṇu—please hear; nāmāni—all the names; lokānām—of the planets; mātṝṇām—of the mothers; śaṅkarāṇi—pleasing; ca—also; atha—now; kaśyapa-patnīnām—of the wives of Kaśyapa; yat-prasūtam—from whom was born; idam—this; jagat—whole universe; aditiḥ—Aditi; ditiḥ—Diti; danuḥ—Danu; kāṣṭhā—Kāṣṭhā; ariṣṭā—Ariṣṭā; surasā—Surasā; ilā—Ilā; muniḥ—Muni; krodhavaśā—Krodhavaśā; tāmrā—Tāmrā; surabhiḥ—Surabhi; saramā—Saramā; timiḥ—Timi; timeḥ—from Timi; yādaḥ-gaṇāḥ—the aquatics; āsan—appeared; śvāpadāḥ—the ferocious animals like the lions and tigers; saramā-sutāḥ—the children of Saramā.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Thereafter the King of the moon pacified Prajāpati Dakṣa with courteous words and thus regained the portions of light he had lost during his disease. Nevertheless he could not beget children. The moon loses his shining power during the dark fortnight, and in the bright fortnight it is manifest again. O King Parīkṣit, now please hear from me the names of Kaśyapa’s wives, from whose wombs the population of the entire universe has come. They are the mothers of almost all the population of the entire universe, and their names are very auspicious to hear. They are Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kāṣṭhā, Ariṣṭā, Surasā, Ilā, Muni, Krodhavaśā, Tāmrā, Surabhi, Saramā and Timi. From the womb of Timi all the aquatics took birth, and from the womb of Saramā the ferocious animals like the tigers and lions took birth.
 
TEXT 27
 
surabher mahiṣā gāvo
 
ye cānye dviśaphā nṛpa
 
tāmrāyāḥ śyena-gṛdhrādyā
 
muner apsarasāṁ gaṇāḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
surabheḥ—from the womb of Surabhi; mahiṣāḥ—buffalo; gāvaḥ—cows; ye—who; ca—also; anye—others; dvi-śaphāḥ—having cloven hooves; nṛpa—O King; tāmrāyāḥ—from Tāmrā; śyena—eagles; gṛdhra-ādyāḥ—vultures and so on; muneḥ—from Muni; apsarasām—of angels; gaṇāḥ—the groups.
 
TRANSLATION
 
My dear King Parīkṣit, from the womb of Surabhi the buffalo, cow and other animals with cloven hooves took birth, from the womb of Tāmrā the eagles, vultures and other large birds of prey took birth, and from the womb of Muni the angels took birth.
 
TEXT 28
 
dandaśūkādayaḥ sarpā
 
rājan krodhavaśātmajāḥ
 
ilāyā bhūruhāḥ sarve
 
yātudhānāś ca saurasāḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
dandaśūka-ādayaḥ—headed by the dandaśūka snakes; sarpāḥ—reptiles; rājan—O King; krodhavaśā-ātma-jāḥ—born from Krodhavaśā; ilāyāḥ—from the womb of Ilā; bhūruhāḥ—the creepers and trees; sarve—all; yātudhānāḥ—the cannibals (Rākṣasas); ca—also; saurasāḥ—from the womb of Surasā.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The sons born of Krodhavaśā were the serpents known as dandaśūka, as well as other serpents and the mosquitoes. All the various creepers and trees were born from the womb of Ilā. The Rākṣasas, bad spirits, were born from the womb of Surasā.
 
TEXTS 29–31
 
ariṣṭāyās tu gandharvāḥ
 
kāṣṭhāyā dviśaphetarāḥ
 
sutā danor eka-ṣaṣṭis
 
teṣāṁ prādhānikāñ śṛṇu
 
dvimūrdhā śambaro ’riṣṭo
 
hayagrīvo vibhāvasuḥ
 
ayomukhaḥ śaṅkuśirāḥ
 
svarbhānuḥ kapilo ’ruṇaḥ
 
pulomā vṛṣaparvā ca
 
ekacakro ’nutāpanaḥ
 
dhūmrakeśo virūpākṣo
 
vipracittiś ca durjayaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
ariṣṭāyāḥ—from the womb of Ariṣṭā; tu—but; gandharvāḥ—the Gandharvas; kāṣṭhāyāḥ—from the womb of Kāṣṭhā; dvi-śapha-itarāḥ—animals such as horses, which do not have cloven hooves; sutāḥ—sons; danoḥ—from the womb of Danu; eka-ṣaṣṭiḥ—sixty-one; teṣām—of them; prādhānikān—the important ones; śṛṇu—hear; dvimūrdhā—Dvimūrdhā; śambaraḥ—Śambara; ariṣṭaḥ—Ariṣṭa; hayagrīvaḥ—Hayagrīva; vibhāvasuḥ—Vibhāvasu; ayomukhaḥ—Ayomukha; śaṅkuśirāḥ—Śaṅkuśirā; svarbhānuḥ—Svarbhānu; kapilaḥ—Kapila; aruṇaḥ—Aruṇa; pulomā—Pulomā; vṛṣaparvā—Vṛṣaparvā; ca—also; ekacakraḥ—Ekacakra; anutāpanaḥ—Anutāpana; dhūmrakeśaḥ—Dhūmrakeśa; virūpākṣaḥ—Virūpākṣa; vipracittiḥ—Vipracitti; ca—and; durjayaḥ—Durjaya.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The Gandharvas were born from the womb of Ariṣṭā, and animals whose hooves are not split, such as the horse, were born from the womb of Kāṣṭhā. O King, from the womb of Danu came sixty-one sons, of whom these eighteen were very important: Dvimūrdhā, Śambara, Ariṣṭa, Hayagrīva, Vibhāvasu, Ayomukha, Śaṅkuśirā, Svarbhānu, Kapila, Aruṇa, Pulomā, Vṛṣaparvā, Ekacakra, Anutāpana, Dhūmrakeśa, Virūpākṣa, Vipracitti and Durjaya.
 
TEXT 32
 
svarbhānoḥ suprabhāṁ kanyām
 
uvāha namuciḥ kila
 
vṛṣaparvaṇas tu śarmiṣṭhāṁ
 
yayātir nāhuṣo balī
 
SYNONYMS
 
svarbhānoḥ—of Svarbhānu; suprabhām—Suprabhā; kanyām—the daughter; uvāha—married; namuciḥ—Namuci; kila—indeed; vṛṣaparvaṇaḥ—of Vṛṣaparvā; tu—but; śarmiṣṭhām—Śarmiṣṭhā; yayātiḥ—King Yayāti; nāhuṣaḥ—the son of Nahuṣa; balī—very powerful.
 
TRANSLATION
 
The daughter of Svarbhānu named Suprabhā was married by Namuci. The daughter of Vṛṣaparvā named Śarmiṣṭhā was given to the powerful King Yayāti, the son of Nahuṣa.
 
TEXTS 33–36
 
vaiśvānara-sutā yāś ca
 
catasraś cāru-darśanāḥ
 
upadānavī hayaśirā
 
pulomā kālakā tathā
 
upadānavīṁ hiraṇyākṣaḥ
 
kratur hayaśirāṁ nṛpa
 
pulomāṁ kālakāṁ ca dve
 
vaiśvānara-sute tu kaḥ
 
upayeme ’tha bhagavān
 
kaśyapo brahma-coditaḥ
 
paulomāḥ kālakeyāś ca
 
dānavā yuddha-śālinaḥ
 
tayoḥ ṣaṣṭi-sahasrāṇi
 
yajña-ghnāṁs te pituḥ pitā
 
jaghāna svar-gato rājann
 
eka indra-priyaṅkaraḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
vaiśvānara-sutāḥ—the daughters of Vaiśvānara; yāḥ—who; ca—and; catasraḥ—four; cāru-darśanāḥ—very, very beautiful; upadānavī—Upadānavī; hayaśirā—Hayaśirā; pulomā—Pulomā; kālakā—Kālakā; tathā—as well; upadānavīm—Upadānavī; hiraṇyākṣaḥ—the demon Hiraṇyākṣa; kratuḥ—Kratu; hayaśirām—Hayaśirā; nṛpa—O King; pulomām kālakām ca—Pulomā and Kālakā; dve—the two; vaiśvānara-sute—daughters of Vaiśvānara; tu—but; kaḥ—the prajāpati; upayeme—married; atha—then; bhagavān—the most powerful; kaśyapaḥ—Kaśyapa Muni; brahma-coditaḥ—requested by Lord Brahmā; paulomāḥ kālakeyāḥ ca—the Paulomas and Kālakeyas; dānavāḥ—demons; yuddha-śālinaḥ—very fond of fighting; tayoḥ—of them; ṣaṣṭi-sahasrāṇi—sixty thousand; yajña-ghnān—who were disturbing sacrifices; te—your; pituḥ—of the father; pitā—the father; jaghāna—killed; svaḥ-gataḥ—in the heavenly planets; rājan—O King; ekaḥ—alone; indra-priyam-karaḥ—to please King Indra.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Vaiśvānara, the son of Danu, had four beautiful daughters, named Upadānavī, Hayaśirā, Pulomā and Kālakā. Hiraṇyākṣa married Upadānavī, and Kratu married Hayaśirā. Thereafter, at the request of Lord Brahmā, Prajāpati Kaśyapa married Pulomā and Kālakā, the other two daughters of Vaiśvānara. From the wombs of these two wives of Kaśyapa came sixty thousand sons, headed by Nivātakavaca, who are known as the Paulomas and the Kālakeyas. They were physically very strong and expert in fighting, and their aim was to disturb the sacrifices performed by the great sages. My dear King, when your grandfather Arjuna went to the heavenly planets, he alone killed all these demons, and thus King Indra became extremely affectionate toward him.
 
TEXT 37
 
vipracittiḥ siṁhikāyāṁ
 
śataṁ caikam ajījanat
 
rāhu-jyeṣṭhaṁ ketu-śataṁ
 
grahatvaṁ ya upāgatāḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
vipracittiḥ—Vipracitti; siṁhikāyām—in the womb of his wife Siṁhikā; śatam—to one hundred; ca—and; ekam—one; ajījanat—gave birth; rāhu-jyeṣṭham—among whom Rāhu is the oldest; ketu-śatam—one hundred Ketus; grahatvam—planethood; ye—all of whom; upāgatāḥ—obtained.
 
TRANSLATION
 
In his wife Siṁhikā, Vipracitti begot one hundred and one sons, of whom the eldest is Rāhu and the others are the one hundred Ketus. All of them attained positions in the influential planets.
 
TEXTS 38–39
 
athātaḥ śrūyatāṁ vaṁśo
 
yo ’diter anupūrvaśaḥ
 
yatra nārāyaṇo devaḥ
 
svāṁśenāvātarad vibhuḥ
 
vivasvān aryamā pūṣā
 
tvaṣṭātha savitā bhagaḥ
 
dhātā vidhātā varuṇo
 
mitraḥ śatru urukramaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
atha—thereafter; ataḥ—now; śrūyatām—let it be heard; vaṁśaḥ—the dynasty; yaḥ—which; aditeḥ—from Aditi; anupūrvaśaḥ—in chronological order; yatra—wherein; nārāyaṇaḥ—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devaḥ—the Lord; sva-aṁśena—by His own plenary expansion; avātarat—descended; vibhuḥ—the Supreme; vivasvān—Vivasvān; aryamā—Aryamā; pūṣā—Pūṣā; tvaṣṭā—Tvaṣṭā; atha—thereafter; savitā—Savitā; bhagaḥ—Bhaga; dhātā—Dhātā; vidhātā—Vidhātā; varuṇaḥ—Varuṇa; mitraḥ—Mitra; śatruḥ—Śatru; urukramaḥ—Urukrama.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Now please hear me as I describe the descendants of Aditi in chronological order. In this dynasty the Supreme Personality of Godhead Nārāyaṇa descended by His plenary expansion. The names of the sons of Aditi are as follows: Vivasvān, Aryamā, Pūṣā, Tvaṣṭā, Savitā, Bhaga, Dhātā, Vidhātā, Varuṇa, Mitra, Śatru and Urukrama.
 
TEXT 40
 
vivasvataḥ śrāddhadevaṁ
 
saṁjñāsūyata vai manum
 
mithunaṁ ca mahā-bhāgā
 
yamaṁ devaṁ yamīṁ tathā
 
saiva bhūtvātha vaḍavā
 
nāsatyau suṣuve bhuvi
 
SYNONYMS
 
vivasvataḥ—of the sun-god; śrāddhadevam—named Śrāddhadeva; saṁjñā—Saṁjñā; asūyata—gave birth; vai—indeed; manum—to Manu; mithunam—twins; ca—and; mahā-bhāgā—the fortunate Saṁjñā; yamam—to Yamarāja; devam—the demigod; yamīm—to his sister named Yamī; tathā—as well as; sā—she; eva—also; bhūtvā—becoming; atha—then; vaḍavā—a mare; nāsatyau—to the Aśvinī-kumāras; suṣuve—gave birth; bhuvi—on this earth.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Saṁjñā, the wife of Vivasvān, the sun-god, gave birth to the Manu named Śrāddhadeva, and the same fortunate wife also gave birth to the twins Yamarāja and the River Yamunā. Then Yamī, while wandering on the earth in the form of a mare, gave birth to the Aśvinī-kumāras.
 
TEXT 41
 
chāyā śanaiścaraṁ lebhe
 
sāvarṇiṁ ca manuṁ tataḥ
 
kanyāṁ ca tapatīṁ yā vai
 
vavre saṁvaraṇaṁ patim
 
SYNONYMS
 
chāyā—Chāyā, another wife of the sun-god; śanaiścaram—Saturn; lebhe—begot; sāvarṇim—Sāvarṇi; ca—and; manum—the Manu; tataḥ—from him (Vivasvān); kanyām—one daughter; ca—as well as; tapatīm—named Tapatī; yā—who; vai—indeed; vavre—married; saṁvaraṇam—Saṁvaraṇa; patim—husband.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Chāyā, another wife of the sun-god, begot two sons named Śanaiścara and Sāvarṇi Manu, and one daughter, Tapatī, who married Saṁvaraṇa.
 
TEXT 42
 
aryamṇo mātṛkā patnī
 
tayoś carṣaṇayaḥ sutāḥ
 
yatra vai mānuṣī jātir
 
brahmaṇā copakalpitā
 
SYNONYMS
 
aryamṇaḥ—of Aryamā; mātṛkā—Mātṛkā; patnī—the wife; tayoḥ—by their union; carṣaṇayaḥ sutāḥ—many sons who were learned scholars; yatra—wherein; vai—indeed; mānuṣī—human; jātiḥ—species; brahmaṇā—by Lord Brahmā; ca—and; upakalpitā—was created.
 
TRANSLATION
 
From the womb of Mātṛkā, the wife of Aryamā, were born many learned scholars. Among them Lord Brahmā created the human species, which are endowed with an aptitude for self-examination.
 
TEXT 43
 
pūṣānapatyaḥ piṣṭādo
 
bhagna-danto ’bhavat purā
 
yo ’sau dakṣāya kupitaṁ
 
jahāsa vivṛta-dvijaḥ
 
SYNONYMS
 
pūṣā—Pūṣā; anapatyaḥ—without children; piṣṭa-adaḥ—who lives by eating flour; bhagna-dantaḥ—with broken teeth; abhavat—became; purā—formerly; yaḥ—who; asau—that; dakṣāya—at Dakṣa; kupitam—very angry; jahāsa—laughed; vivṛta-dvijaḥ—uncovering his teeth.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Pūṣā had no sons. When Lord Śiva was angry at Dakṣa, Pūṣā had laughed at Lord Śiva and shown his teeth. Therefore he lost his teeth and had to live by eating only ground flour.
 
TEXT 44
 
tvaṣṭur daityātmajā bhāryā
 
racanā nāma kanyakā
 
sanniveśas tayor jajñe
 
viśvarūpaś ca vīryavān
 
SYNONYMS
 
tvaṣṭuḥ—of Tvaṣṭā; daitya-ātma-jā—the daughter of a demon; bhāryā—wife; racanā—Racanā; nāma—named; kanyakā—a maiden; sanniveśaḥ—Sanniveśa; tayoḥ—of those two; jajñe—was born; viśvarūpaḥ—Viśvarūpa; ca—and; vīryavān—very powerful in bodily strength.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Racanā, the daughter of the Daityas, became the wife of Prajāpati Tvaṣṭā. By his semina he begot in her womb two very powerful sons named Sanniveśa and Viśvarūpa.
 
TEXT 45
 
taṁ vavrire sura-gaṇā
 
svasrīyaṁ dviṣatām api
 
vimatena parityaktā
 
guruṇāṅgirasena yat
 
SYNONYMS
 
tam—him (Viśvarūpa); vavrire—accepted as a priest; sura-gaṇāḥ—the demigods; svasrīyam—the son of a daughter; dviṣatām—of the inimical demons; api—although; vimatena—being disrespected; parityaktāḥ—who were given up; guruṇā—by their spiritual master; āṅgirasena—Bṛhaspati; yat—since.
 
TRANSLATION
 
Although Viśvarūpa was the son of the daughter of their eternal enemies the demons, the demigods accepted him as their priest in accordance with the order of Brahmā when they were abandoned by their spiritual master, Bṛhaspati, whom they had disrespected.
 
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled “The Progeny of the Daughters of Dakṣa.”
Link to this page: https://prabhupadabooks.com/sb/6/6
    
        
        
        
    
Previous: SB 6.5: Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa     Next: SB 6.7: Indra Offends His Spiritual Master, Brhaspati.
 



 
